Prison Life
When someone is put in prison they have at least one interview and assessment to make sure they understand prison rules and procedures, know what their rights are, get the right healthcare, are told of courses available. The prisoner gets a prison number and their property is recorded and put somewhere safe until they’re released. Prisoners are also given a security category based on how likely they are to try to escape or their risk of causing harm to other prisoners and prison staff.
Prisoners who follow rules can earn privileges. This is called the ‘lncentives and Earned Privileges Scheme’. A prisoner may be able to get more visits from family or friends and may be allowed to spend more money each week. Prisoners who break prison rules are normally punished. They can be kept in their cell for up to 21 days, can be given up to 42 extra days in prison on top of their original sentence or the prison can take away some privileges - removing a TV from a cell.
Prisoners get the same healthcare as anyone outside prison. Treatment is free but has to be approved by a prison doctor or member of the healthcare team. Prisons don’t have hospitals, but many have in-patient beds. In some cases, the prison can get specialist support if prisoners have drug or alcohol problems, have HIV or AIDS, are disabled or have a learning difficulty. The healthcare team can ask the prisoner’s family doctor for their records, but only if the prisoner agrees to it.
Staff are trained to spot prisoners at risk of bullying, suicide or self-harm. Prisoners may get their own case manager who will make sure they are asked about their mental health if they’re feeling depressed. Most prisons also launch ‘listener schemes’ that offer emotional support in confidence - normally from fellow prisoners. Prisoners can be moved to a secure psychiatric hospital for their own safety. This only happens if they meet certain conditions under the Mental Health Act. Once the prisoner gets better, he returns to prison.
Courses are normally available to help prisoners get new skills - learning to read and write, use computers and do basic maths. Most prisoners get an Individual Learning Plan listing courses and training. Most courses lead to qualifications that are recognized by employers outside prison, such as GCSEs or NVQs. Prisoners may be able to do a distance learning course in Open University. Many prisoners get the chance to work in prison workshops while carrying out their sentence. A ‘low-risk’ prisoner may be allowed to work in the community.
