Master of Law (LLM) Programs
The LLM program at the University of Toronto Faculty of Law offers a flexible and rigorous full-time academic program for Canadian and international law graduates seeking opportunities for advanced study and research. LLM students have gone on to pursue further graduate legal education, entered directly into university teaching positions, or resumed practice with private firms, government agencies and non-governmental organizations.
At Columbia Law School students focus on a diverse range of areas like constitutional law, international human rights, law and economics, and legal theory. The LLM programs can be undertaken with a strong emphasis on a thesis or coursework-only. The longer thesis is aimed at law students who have demonstrated a strong potential for advanced research, many of whom desire a career in legal academia.
Essex Law School offers LLM programs that allow students to earn their degrees remotely. The Faculty covers concentrations in the area of Business Law, Criminal Law, Legal Theory and Health Law, Ethics and Policy within the LLM degree program. Entry into these concentrations is on a competitive basis. These programs are perfect for students who can't afford to take a year off.
George Washington University does not encourage candidates to contact potential faculty supervisors before applying. The coursework-only format is designed for international law students who wish to specialize in a specific area of law, particularly in one of the Faculty of Law's several strengths, to develop an understanding of the US and North American legal processes and laws, or to explore the common law at an advanced level.
Victoria University’s Faculty of Law offers a general LLM with coursework, covering subjects including intellectual property law, business, human rights and the environment, and law reform and policy, a key subject area in the nations’ capital. The school attracts a lot of LLM applicants from outside the country. One of the things that attracts people is our internship option, which is not so common in LLM programs.
The philosophy of the LLM program is to offer our students a broad platform to design their own course of study within parameters set by Harvard Law School faculty. Within this framework, LLM students have enormous latitude in planning their year. Interested faculty and special student advisers work hard throughout the year to help students to identify and refine their study objectives.
